Hello.
I'm here to talk about
Network Kernel Extensions on Tiger.
As you probably already heard,
we've made a number of massive changes.
To the networking stack,
we had a few goals.
We needed to get better SMP scalability.
We've been chipping dual processor
machines for a long time and the way that
the locking model is set up in the Kernel
in Panther and previous releases really
didn't give us an ability to take full
advantage of those multiple processors.
In addition, we wanted to add support for
64-bit user space processes.
And these changes required--
in order to implement this,
we needed to make a lot of changes
to data structures and move
a number of functions around.
And it really led to massive
changes almost everywhere,
which broke Kernel Extensions,
the previous Network Kernel Extensions.
So if you have a Network Kernel
Extension today that's
loading on Panther,
it won't load on Tiger.
If you're just an I/O Kit driver,
an Ethernet driver or something,
you'll be okay.
But if you've been using the
old DLL layer or socket filters,
protocol filters, any of that stuff,
you're going to need to make changes
to your NKE to get it to work on Tiger.
Some of these changes involve
moving to using opaque data
structures and accessor functions.
We provide Kernel Programming
Interfaces which are well-defined set
of interfaces for interacting with
these data structures and the stack.
The initial implementation of
these KPIs is available in the
WWDC build that's on your CD.
There are actually some bugs in
the kernel on that that will lead
to a panic in a few situations.
So along with the previous session,
session 103,
there's some content that's available
online and part of that is a new kernel
that you can use when you're trying to
test these kernel programming interfaces.
So I encourage you to go ahead and
download that and install that.
There's a readme that explains how to
get it installed and that'll let you play
around with what I'm about to show you.
So we're going to go over the
Kernel Programming Interfaces.
Again, these are available on Tiger.
These should give us more stability
so that when we make changes in
the future we aren't going to keep
breaking your Kernel Extensions.
And moving over to these Kernel
Programming Interfaces is required
to get your KEX running on Tiger.
Many of the symbols that you used
to link against are no longer there.
So, with a better SMP scalability,
as I said, we've been shipping these dual
processor machines for a long time,
and we've been using this
thing called a funnel,
the network funnel,
to protect all of the data
structures inside the kernel,
and it's basically one big lock.
We've taken that one big lock and
we've moved to finer-grained locking,
where we use a bunch
of locking primitives,
such as the simple lock, a mutex,
and multiple reader, single writer locks,
and we've really broken it down so that
we can have multiple processors running
through the stack at the same time.
One of the results of this is that
the Kernel Extensions are responsible
for protecting their own data.
Since there's no longer one big
lock that both the stack and the
Kernel Extensions are running under,
they have to be aware that
they could be re-entered.
The internal locking model that we use
is mostly transparent to the NKEs and
that was done intentionally so that we
will be able to make changes to that in
the future as we tune the performance.
So in Panther,
we have one big lock around
networking and we have another
big lock around the file systems.
And in Tiger, for the networking stack,
we moved to a bunch of smaller
locks in various areas.
And we're going to continue to
fine tune the exact locking model.
And the KPIs are intended to
keep that transparent so that you
don't have to be involved with it.
And we won't break you if we change it.
We did change the data structures in a
lot of ways in order to implement this,
adding locks to these structures
and moving stuff around,
adding reference counts.
This did affect the binary compatibility.
We're going to have all Kernel private
data structures be opaque and we're
going to provide accessor functions
so that in the future when we need
to make additional changes to these,
it won't cause problems.
We won't have to break your KEXT,
you won't have to recompile,
you won't have to deal with any of that.
There are five main network KPIs.
There's the Network Interface
KPI for providing new interfaces
to the networking stack.
There's the Socket KPI for
interacting with sockets in
the stack inside the kernel.
This is commonly used for
network file systems such as NFS,
AFP, and SMB.
[Transcript missing]
And finally we have the Network Interface
Filter which gives you an ability to
filter packets at the interface layer.
There are a number of additional helper
KPIs for getting access to various
things such as mBuffs or communicating
with a user daemon in user space.
So we have a diagram of
the networking stack here,
and at the top layer we have the sockets.
The items in blue can be
provided by Kernel Extensions.
So the Kernel Extensions can
interact with the socket,
they can create a socket filter,
they can create an IP filter,
they can create what we call plumbers,
which I'll go into a little bit later,
as well as interfaces
and interface filters.
So the Network Interface layer,
it's actually broken up
into two different sections
or two different layers.
There's the Interface layer,
which has the interface itself,
such as an Ethernet
interface or PPP interface.
And then there's the Plumber layer.
And the Plumber is the glue
between a specific protocol,
such as IP, and an interface,
such as Ethernet.
So ideally the interface,
such as Ethernet,
would know nothing about the protocol,
and the protocol shouldn't know
anything about the interface.
it's the plumber's responsibility
to tie these two things together.
If you're familiar with the
Data Link Interface Layer,
one of the things we've done is
eliminate the Interface Family Modules.
We found that a lot of the
functionality that was provided by the
Interface Family Module was already,
was usually tied to the interface.
So we just went ahead and rolled all
that functionality into the interface,
which makes it a lot easier to provide
a new interface because instead
of having to write an interface
and an Interface Family Module,
you just do it all in the interface.
We've also eliminated DL tags.
So when you're sending or receiving,
the packets will--what used to be a
DL tag is now identified by both the
interface and the protocol family.
So at the bottom of the stack
we have Network Interfaces.
And the Network Interface KPI gives
you the ability to provide new
interfaces to the networking stack.
A Network Interface has five
primary responsibilities.
Network Interface is responsible for
inputting packets into the stack,
as well as demuxing the packets
or determining which protocol
a specific packet belongs to.
As part of the DMUX, it has to handle,
add, and delete protocols so that it can
keep track of the DMUX descriptor
mapping to protocol family mapping so
it can match packets when they come in.
The interface is also responsible
for framing the outbound packets,
basically putting an
interface header on it,
as well as outputting the actual
packets and handling iOctals for cases
where multicast filterless changes
or other state changes are requested.
The network interface is
documented in net/kpi_interface.h
in the Kernel Framework.
Network interfaces go
through a typical life cycle.
The network interface is allocated,
and then various parameters and
properties of that interface are set.
Once the interface is set up correctly,
the interface is attached
to the networking stack.
At that point, the protocols attach,
and then packets are sent and received,
and then the interface
can request a detach.
The protocols detach from the interface,
and then the interface itself
is detached from the stack.
So to allocate an interface,
there's an IFNET allocate function and
you fill out an IFNET init parameter,
a param structure that defines most of
the initial parameters of the interface.
Part of that is a unique
ID and an interface family.
Right now,
the networking stack keeps pointers
to the network interface all over
the place and it doesn't properly ref
count its references to the interface.
So we can't just get rid of the
interface when your interface goes away.
We end up recycling it.
In the future,
we hope to get rid of this,
but for now we're kind of stuck with it.
There are some little
gotchas though with this.
When you're allocating an
interface and you specify a
unique ID and an interface family,
there must not be another interface
that's currently attached with that
unique ID and interface family.
If there is an interface
and it's detaching,
then you may block until that
detach is completed so that we can
recycle to you the same interface.
Again, the recycle mechanism is temporary
and we provide an IFNET reference
and IFNET release for handling
the reference counting.
For now, when IFNET release reaches zero,
the interface gets recycled.
In the future, we will free it.
After you've allocated the interface,
you can set additional properties.
Once you've set up the interface
the way that you want it,
you can use IFNET attach to attach
the interface to the networking stack.
You can also specify a link
layer address that will be
associated with that interface.
At this point the interface now
appears in ifconfig and a kernel
event gets generated to notify the
stack and people in user space,
or processes in user space,
that a new interface has attached.
And that may trigger protocols to attach.
The protocol attaches usually
triggered from user space in
response to a kernel event that
an interface has been attached.
The Plumber code is responsible
for handling the attach.
Its Plumb function gets called to
attach the protocol to the interface,
which in turn triggers the
interface's add protocol function.
The interfaces add protocol function
gets past a list of Dmux descriptors
and those Dmux descriptors then
map to a specific protocol family.
It's the interface's responsibility to
keep track of those mappings so that
when the interface's Dmux function gets
called to match a packet to a protocol,
it can refer to that list that it stored.
The protocol detach is also
handled by the plumber.
The plumber's unplumb function is called,
which then calls a function to detach
the protocol from the interface.
The interface's delete
protocol function gets called,
which gives the interface an
opportunity to clean up that demux
descriptor to protocol family mapping.
Once this is done,
the protocol's detached callback is
called to notify the protocol that it
has been detached from the interface.
The outbound packet path
is a little bit complex.
The protocol calls ifnet output,
and ifnet output calls any interface
filters pre-output functions
and give the filters a chance
to process the packet before an
interface header has been prepended.
Once that's done,
the protocol's pre-output
function is called.
The protocol's pre-output function
is responsible for determining the
destination link layer address.
This may require performing
an ARP or whatever,
neighborhood discovery for IPv6.
The protocol's pre-output
function is also responsible
for determining the frame type.
From there,
the destination link layer address
and the frame type are passed on
to the interface's framer function,
which then generates
the interface header.
At that point,
the interface filters are all
given an opportunity to filter
the fully formed packet before
the interface's output function
is called to transmit the packet.
On the inbound side,
the driver is responsible
for calling IFNET input to
pass the packet to the stack.
I have an input queues the packet
and at a later time the input thread
comes along and dequeues the packet.
It then calls the interface's
demux function to determine which
protocol that packet belongs to.
The protocol's interface
filters are then called,
and finally the protocol's
input function is called.
To request a detach from the stack,
the driver can call ifnet detach.
The detaches are
asynchronous with a callback.
When you call ifnet detach,
there's a kernel event that
gets generated to notify
the stack and processes that
the interface is going away.
And this can lead to the protocol-- this
leads to the protocols being detached.
Once all of the protocols
have been detached,
the interface is removed
from the list of interfaces.
and the interfaces detach function
is called back to let the interface
know that it's safe to unload and
that it won't be called again.
At this point the stack releases its
reference on the interface and if
there are no other references the
interface is either recycled or freed.
There are some locking considerations
when you're working with or supplying
an interface to the networking stack.
The access to your network
interface is not serialized,
so you need to protect any
of your data structures.
There are also some limitations in
what you can do from your callbacks.
You cannot add another interface or add
a protocol from any of the callbacks that
you supply through the network interface.
In addition, if you're going to try
and detach an interface,
a protocol, or an interface filter,
these operations will be delayed.
You do get some
protection with the demux.
Your demux function will never
be called at the same time that
either your add protocol or delete
protocol functions are being called.
In addition,
your add protocol function will never
be called at the same time as your
delete protocol function is called.
So if you're using a linked list or
something to keep track of the demux
descriptor to protocol family mappings,
you can manipulate that list in your
add and delete protocol functions
without worrying about locking it.
Moving up the stack a little bit more,
we have the Protocol Plumbers,
which are responsible for
gluing an interface to Protocol.
and these have the knowledge
of how a specific protocol
runs over a specific interface.
This is where knowledge of how to
perform ARP or neighbor discovery or in
the case of Apple talk AARP would live.
The protocol plumber registers
a plumb and an unplumb function,
and the plumb function is responsible
for attaching the protocol,
and an unplumb function is responsible
for detaching the protocol.
The protocol plumbers are
documented in net/kpi_protocol.h
in the Kernel Framework.
The Plum function typically calls
IFNET attach protocol and it specifies a
list of demux descriptors which describe
in an interface specific way the type
of packets that this protocol wants.
The plumber also specifies an
input function that will get
called for any of the packets that
are received for this protocol,
as well as a pre-output function,
an event function for handling
events on the interface,
an ioctyl for handling any
protocol-specific event,
ioctyls on that interface,
and a detached function to get notified
when the protocol has been detached.
The protocol's input
function is important.
This is where any ARP packets get
handled or something similar depending
on which protocol you're supporting.
In addition,
if you need to strip any headers off
or do anything else so that you can
just pass a raw packet to the protocol,
you do that in the Plumber input
function before you call ProtoInput.
ProtoInput is the function that
you use to pass a packet to a
protocol once you've taken anything
out that's interface specific.
The protocol plumber's pre-output
function gets called on the
outbound path just before the
framer function for the interface.
And this gives the protocol plumber
an opportunity to perform any ARPs.
The protocol plumber is responsible
for determining the destination link
layer address and the frame type.
So that those can be passed to
the interface framer function.
When you're working
with a protocol plumber,
there are a number of
locking considerations.
The unregister is synchronous and
the unregister won't actually detach
your protocols from interfaces.
So you need to keep account of how
many times you've attached if you're
supplying any function pointers such
as the input or pre-output functions.
Because until you've been
detached from every interface,
your code's still going to get called.
And if you unload before
you've been detached,
you're going to run into a panic.
There are some restrictions
in what you can do in your
plumb and unplumb functions.
You really,
you must not try and register or
unregister another plumber and you
also cannot trigger a plumb or unplumb
function for any other protocols.
If you do this you'll
run into a deadlock.
At the top layer we have sockets
and the socket KPI gives you access
to sockets inside of the kernel.
The KPI is based on the user space APIs,
and it only lets you get
access as a client of a socket.
You can't implement a protocol
and interact with a socket in
the ways that a protocol would.
In place of a struck socket pointer,
you now use a socket T.
In user space, of course,
you use file descriptors.
But since this -- in the kernel,
since the layout of a
socket structure is private,
we're moving to the opaque type socket T.
Sockets go through a typical life cycle.
The socket is created,
various options are set.
The socket is connected, data is sent,
data is received,
and the socket is closed.
The socket KPI is documented in
sys/kpisocket.h in the Kernel Framework.
To create a socket,
we use the function sock socket.
It's very similar to the
socket function in user space.
The major difference is that it allows
you to specify an up call function.
And the up call function will let you
get notification when data is ready.
So in this example,
we're creating a TCP socket.
And we're going to get back the socket.
We're passing in my up call
as the up call function.
And my cookie is a parameter that will
get passed to the up call function.
The Socket Sup call gets called
when either data is waiting to be
read or a connection is completed.
Access to your upcall
function is not serialized,
so if you're going to be
manipulating data in your upcall,
be sure to take any locks.
The upcall is also
called on the fast path.
If you make a blocking call in here,
you'll actually stop all incoming data if
you make a blocking call in the socket.
In addition,
if you do any processing that's
going to take a little while,
you should really do it
elsewhere because you're going
to hold up a lot of other stuff.
In this case we have an up call function.
The state's stored in the cookie and we
check to see if we're connected and then
we perform a read after taking a lock.
We should take a lock
where the comment's at.
And then we deal with some of the data
and then we would release the lock.
You can use sock-set-sock-opt and
sock-ioctal to set various options.
There's also a sock-get-sock-opt
to retrieve options.
In this example,
we can see sock-ioctal is being used
to set the socket to non-blocking I/O.
And the sock-set-sock-opt is
being used to set the receive
buffer size to about 32K.
There is no...
The function that you'd usually use to
make a file descriptor non-blocking isn't
available in the kernel because you're
not working with a file descriptor here,
you just have a raw socket.
So in order to set non-blocking I/O,
you really need to call sock_ioctal.
Connecting a socket is
pretty straightforward.
Sock connect is based on
the connect user space call.
The difference between SOC connect
and the old ESSO connect,
if you've done any programming in
the kernel before with sockets,
is that SOC connect will actually block
if the socket is a blocking socket.
If you set the socket to non-blocking
or you specify message "Don't
wait" as the last parameter,
then this will give you
a non-blocking connect.
You can use the function sock is
connected to determine whether or not
the socket has completed its connection.
And your up call will get called
when this connection completes
with either success or failure.
For sending,
there are two different functions.
Both of them are based on send message,
so they use a message header.
Socks_send will send data that's
stored in a kernel buffer,
and socks_send_mbuff will send data
that's stored in a chain of mBuffs.
In this example,
we're filling out a message header,
and we're setting the I/O vec to
the kernel buffer that we have.
And we set up the name to point
to the destination that we want,
and then we call socks_send
to send the data.
Receiving is very similar.
There are two receive functions and
they're based on receive message.
So there's SOC_RECEIVE and
SOC_RECEIVE_MBUFF.
SOC_RECEIVE receives data into a Kernel
Buffer and SOC_RECEIVE_MBUFF receives
data into... receives data as the MBUFFs.
In this example,
we're calling sock receive and we're
filling out our message header first and
we're specifying a buffer in the kernel.
And when you're all done with the socket,
you use sock_close.
You can't call sock_close on a
socket that's associated with
a file descriptor because that
will really confuse the kernel.
Since this API doesn't do anything
with the file descriptors,
you're going behind the
file descriptors back.
There are some locking considerations.
Don't make calls to sockets
concurrently on different threads.
While you're protected in user space
through the file descriptor layer,
if you do this in the kernel,
we're not going through
the file descriptor layer,
so that protection is pretty much gone.
And especially if you're
reading on one socket and close
the socket on another socket,
you're going to run into a
kernel panic pretty quickly.
[Transcript missing]
So we have a socket filter
KPI that lets you filter data and
connections and other socket related
operations at the socket layer.
These are commonly used for implementing
a socket layer firewall so you
don't have to deal with keeping
track of all the state yourself.
You can actually let the stack do that.
You can also use it for implementing
privacy controls or content filters
as well as transparent proxies.
And the socket filter KPI is
documented in sys/kpi_socketfilter.h
in the Kernel Framework.
[Transcript missing]
So, I'm going to start off with a little
bit of a brief introduction to the NKEs.
I'm going to start off with a little
If you specify that you
want a global filter,
that global filter will then be attached
to any new sockets that are created
after you've registered your filter.
And if you specify a programmatic filter,
those filters will be attached
when somebody uses the SONKE socket
option to request your filter
be attached to their socket.
[Transcript missing]
When a socket filter is
attached to a socket,
the attach function gets called
and this gives the socket filter an
opportunity to allocate some data for
storing state that will be associated
with that connection to that socket.
If you want to,
you can return an error to
prevent your socket filter from
being attached to the socket.
To unregister and detach your sockets,
you can call SFLT_UNREGISTER.
And this is also an asynchronous
unregister with a callback to
let you know when it's completed.
When you call this function,
it will prevent any more sockets from
being attached to your socket filter,
and it'll start detaching your
socket filter from all of the sockets
that it's currently attached to.
So your socket filter will get
detached when either the socket is
closed or the filter is unregistered.
The SF_UNREGISTERED callback
that you can specify indicates
that the detach has been complete
and it's safe for you to unload.
For filtering inbound data,
in the past you had to
filter or patch SB append,
SB append data, SB append control.
It was kind of complicated
and convoluted.
There's just one inbound data
filter now called SFDataIn.
This function is not called in the
context of the socket owners process.
So looking at the proc info to get
information is not going to be useful.
From this function you can modify
the data in the mbuf chain.
The return value from this
function is very important.
If you return zero,
the data continues being
processed as normal.
If you return eGIS return,
the processing is going to stop and
it's going to assume that you've
taken responsibility for that data
and that data will not be freed.
If you return any other error,
the processing will stop
and the data will be freed.
If you do swallow the data by
returning an error or e-just-return,
the process that owns the
socket won't be woken up.
If you need to inject data later,
you can use the
SOC_INJECT_DATA_IN function.
For outbound data, it's much the same.
There's an SF data out
callback that you can specify.
This is usually called in the context
of the socket owner's process.
The data can be modified and the return
values are just the same for data out.
If you return a zero,
then it processes as normal.
If you return e just return,
then the processing stops and
you're free to hold onto that data.
If you return any other value,
the processing stops
and the data gets freed.
If you need to later inject some data
that you had queued or something,
you can use sock inject data out.
You can also filter binds.
This lets you either bind to a
different address from the requested
one or prevent the bind altogether.
If you need to bind to
a different address,
call SOC bind again on the same socket,
but with the new address
that you want to bind to,
and then return e just return.
Or if you got an error back from
your second call to SOC bind,
you need to return that error.
If you do intercept the bind
and bind to a different address,
you may want to also intercept the
get SOC name so that you can keep
the process thinking that it bound to
the socket that it tried to bind to.
You can also filter connects
both inbound and outbound.
For inbound connects you can
only allow them or disallow them.
You can't change the address that
the connection is coming in from.
For the outbound connections,
you can allow or disallow.
And you can also connect
to a different address.
If you need to connect
to a different address,
call SOC connect again and specify
the new address and then return
eJustReturn if SOC connect succeeded.
If SOC connect failed,
then go ahead and return the error
that you got from SOC connect.
And again,
you can intercept getPeerName to keep
the process thinking that it connected
to the address that it had requested.
There are some additional
filter points for sockets.
The SF notifies you of
socket state changes.
For example,
when you're being disconnected or
you're in the disconnecting state.
You can also intercept socket
options using the SF set option
and SF get option callbacks.
You can intercept iOctals.
You can either handle them or block them.
And you can also intercept listen
to prevent processes from being
able to create listening sockets.
Moving.
So moving down the
stack a little bit more,
we have IP filters.
IP filters give you a chance to
filter packets at the IP layer.
And the really nice thing about
IP filters is that the packets are
passed to you after they've been
reassembled on the inbound side,
so you don't have to deal with fragments.
On the outbound side,
you get the packets before
they've been fragmented.
and the filter is also
interface independent,
so you don't have to worry about
attaching a different filter to
every single interface that comes
up and has IP attached to it.
You also get an opportunity to process
the packets both before and after IPSec.
The IP filters go through
a typical life cycle.
They're attached to either IPv4 or IPv6.
And then they filter
inbound and outbound data.
And then they're detached.
They're documented in
that inet/kpi_ipfilter.h
in the Kernel Framework.
The IP filters are attached using
IPF_ADD_V4 and IPF_ADD_V6 and they
both use the same structure to define
a input and output filter function.
Calling these functions returns
a filter ref that you use for
later detaching the filter.
[Transcript missing]
called before we fragment the packet,
but also before and after
we do any IPSec processing.
So the function gets called,
and it's passed in the protocol.
And the protocol specifies the protocol
that we're currently processing at.
And you also get an offset from the
beginning of the packet to that protocol.
So the beginning of the mbuf chain
will always start at the IP header,
or IPv6 header.
And then for an IPSec packet,
you might get called
once with the ESP header,
with the offset from the
IP packet to the ESP header.
And once IPSec has decrypted the packet,
you'll get called again with TCP or ICMP,
and the offset from the
IP header to the ICMP header.
You can use IPF inject input and
IPF inject output to inject data.
With IPF inject input,
it injects the data right
after the packets have been
reassembled in IP input.
If you pass a filter ref,
it will prevent this packet from
getting processed again by both your
filter and any filters before you.
If you've modified the packet,
you shouldn't pass a filter
ref because that'll prevent any
filters from having a chance to
look at the new modified packet.
IPF inject output injects the data
right into the IP output function.
And again you can pass a filter ref
to avoid processing the packets twice.
To detach your filter,
you call IPF remove.
This detach is asynchronous and your
IPF detach callback will get called
to notify you when your filter has
been detached and it's safe to unload.
There are some
considerations with locking.
Again, access to your IP filter
is not serialized,
so you need to be sure and protect
any data structures that you've got.
In addition,
if you're going to call to inject data,
you need to drop the locks
before performing the inject
because there's a chance that you
might get called re-entrantly,
and if you try and take your lock again,
then you end up with a deadlock.
This is broken in the WWDC build.
You'll need to use the kernel
that comes as part of the
session 103 supplemental stuff.
Moving down to the bottom of the
stack we have the Interface Filters.
The Interface Filters let you
filter inbound and outbound
packets at the interface layer.
You can also filter the iOctals.
Interface Filters are commonly
used for a packet layer firewall or
something like a virtual packet switch.
The interface filters are also the
replacement for the old protocol filter.
We no longer have protocol filters.
The interface filters are documented
in net/kpi_interfacefilter.h
in the Kernel Framework.
To attach an interface filter,
you fill out an IFF filter structure,
and then you call ifltattach.
This gives you an opportunity
to specify a protocol.
It's important to note that the
protocol doesn't specify -- you aren't
attached to that protocol attachment.
With the old protocol filters,
if you wanted to attach to IP over EN0,
you could only do that when
IP was attached to EN0.
With the new interface filters,
you can specify that you
want to get IP packets,
and you can attach to EN0
even when IP isn't attached.
And your filter will remain
attached until the interface
goes away or until you detach it.
You just won't receive any packets
unless IP is actually attached.
When you're ready to detach your filter,
you call iflt_detach.
And this is asynchronous with a callback
to let you know when it's safe to unload.
For filtering inbound packets,
the interfaces demux function
gets called first to give it an
opportunity to match the packet to
a protocol so that we can know which
interface filters to pass this to.
If you specify zero for the protocol,
then you get all packets for any
protocol or packets that don't match
any protocol that's currently attached.
Your IFF input function will get called.
It's allowed to modify the packet.
If it does need to modify the packet,
it should verify that the
checksums are correct,
if it's going to make any changes
that affect the checksums,
and it should call mbuf_inbound_modified.
And this will clear all of the
checksum flags so that we don't
try and perform a hardware checksum
later and run into problems.
The return values are important,
like in the socket filter.
If you return a zero,
then the processing continues as normal.
If you return eJustReturn,
the processing stops,
but the packet's not freed.
So you're responsible for either
queuing it and reinjecting it later,
or freeing it,
or doing whatever you want with it.
But you're responsible for freeing it.
If you return any other value,
it'll end up freeing the packet,
and the processing will stop.
On the outbound side you have two
different places that you can filter.
There's a pre-output function that
lets you handle the packet before the
interfaces framer has had a chance
to prepend the interface header.
On the outbound,
you also have the IFF output
function which gives you a chance
to process the fully formed packet
which includes the interface header.
If you're going to modify the packet,
you should call mbuf outbound finalize,
which will force it to do any
checksums in software that would
have been done in hardware,
so you get a fully formed packet.
And it also clears all
the checksum flags,
so if you reinject it somewhere else,
you don't run into problems.
This may perform additional work,
such as inserting a VLAN header,
although those packets probably
won't get past your filter.
The return value is important and it's
just like the return values for the
socket filter and the inbound filter.
If you return zero,
then processing continues as normal.
If you return eJustReturn,
then you get to hold onto the packet.
If you return any error value,
then the packet gets freed
and the processing stops.
There are some additional places,
additional filter stuff you can
set up at the interface layer.
The IFF event lets you receive
notifications of events on the filter,
on the interface.
Most common events are protocols
attaching and detaching and
the interface detaching.
The IFF Ioctal lets you filter the
Ioctal functions so you can either
intercept and handle your own Ioctals
or you can intercept Ioctals that
would normally go to the interface.
If you need to inject
inbound or outbound data,
you can use the IFNET input
function and IFNET output functions.
If you need to communicate
with a user space process,
the easiest way to do that is
to use the Kernel Control KPI.
Kernel Control gives you a
way to send small messages
over a socket to user space.
It's commonly used for configuring
a Kernel Extension or for retrieving
information from a Kernel Extension.
The Kernel Control KPI is
documented in sys/kerncontrol.h
in the Kernel Framework.
Registering a kernel frame--sorry,
registering a kernel control
is done by filling out a
Kernel Control Register struct
and calling control register.
This lets your Kernel
Extension receive notification when
a socket connects to your Kernel
control or when it disconnects.
It also lets you receive information
from user land and you can handle
get and set socket options.
[Transcript missing]
So when your control connect
function gets called,
you can allocate any data that
you need to associate with that
connection to a specific socket.
And then you need to free that on
your control disconnect callback.
If you need to send data to the process,
to the socket, you can use control and
Q data and control and Q mbuf.
Control and Q data works with a kernel
buffer and control and Q mbuf works with
data that's stored in an mbuf chain.
With the kernel control,
access to it is not serialized,
but it is safe to send to
the client at any time.
So, with it not being serialized,
you really need to protect any data
structures that you interact with
whenever you get a callback to notify
you that there's data on the socket.
In addition, there's another helper, KPI,
the protocol layer.
And this is documented
in net/kpi_protocol.h
in the Kernel Framework.
This supplies to you the hooks for
injecting packets into a protocol.
There are two functions,
the proto-input function and
the proto-inject function.
The proto-input function is intended
for plumbers for passing packets
up to IP or IPv6 or even AppleTalk.
And they're really meant
for the inbound packet path.
If you're going to be injecting
packets from anywhere else in the stack
where you're not on the inbound path,
you need to use the
proto-inject function.
And these are the replacement
for the net_isr mechanism
that used to queue packets and
then wake up the input thread.
In addition,
there's an MBUF KPI that gives you access
to the data that's stored in MBUFs.
All of the packets in the stack
are stored in mBuffs along with a
bunch of other useful information.
The mbuf KPI is based on the
original mbuf interfaces and we've
added a lot of accessor functions.
The accessor functions names are based
on the field name in the old mbuf.
So for example mbuf_length
gets the length of the mbuf.
The headers in the mBufs
have changed a little bit.
And the result of those changes
may be that you can't store quite
as much data in an mBuf that has a
packet header or even a regular mBuf.
And the cluster sizes might also change.
So don't make any assumptions
about the amount of data that
you can store in an mBuf.
You can use mBufstat to get the values
of all of the sizes for the various
mBufs with headers and clusters.
We may be changing these things again.
We changed them in Tiger to
add support for mbuf tags.
The MBuff KPI is documented
in sys/kpi_mbuff.h
There's still a number of things that
are missing and we're working to get
these in there as quickly as we can.
There's no access to the routing tables,
which makes it a little bit
difficult for the plumbers to
perform their ARP code correctly.
There's also no access to BPF,
but we will be providing
access for TIGER.
There are no accessors for indicating
that you support hardware checksums or
for detecting that a packet requires
or requests some hardware checksum.
There are the two functions for
clearing those flags on both
the inbound and outbound side.
There isn't a whole lot of sample code,
but we're working to change that.
In addition, the kernel framework hasn't
been completely cleaned up yet.
For Tiger GM,
we're hoping to get the kernel framework
cleaned so that there aren't any
data structures or functions in that
framework that aren't part of the KPI.
In addition, the list of exported symbols
through the BSD kernel text
hasn't been cleaned up yet,
so there are still some symbols
in there that we don't want
to have as part of the KPI.
But for Tiger GM, we will clean that up.
In addition,
we really need your feedback.
We have an email address set up,
kpi-feedback@apple.com.
And we need you to get started
soon because the earlier
that you give us feedback,
the easier it's going to be for us to get
the changes that you need into the kernel
so that you can get your Network Kernel
Extension working on Tiger.
There are some resources
for more information.
Craig Keithley is the
IO Technology Evangelist.
And there's the
KPI feedback email address,
kpi-feedback@apple.com.
In addition,
we have some more reference stuff.
The NKE, the Network Kernel
Extension KPI reference is available
online and also in the developer
folder that gets installed with Tiger.
There's some more reference stuff.